[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well, if
you watch Gaia Television,
you're going to know this
fellow I'm about to introduce--
Ben Stewart, a world-renowned
musician, filmmaker,
speaker on spiritual ascension,
super-human potential,
and self-discovery.
He's got some great
films and documentaries,
which we'll get into as well.
Ben, welcome to Beyond Belief.
>>BEN STEWART: Thank you.
It's an honor to be here.
>>NOORY: This is very
different for me.
Because you're a
musician by trade,
spent years in the Air Force,
and now you're dealing with
this-- what I would call--
super-humanism and
transformation.
How did you make that
evolutionary turn.
>>STEWART: Really, the
evolution found me.
I've always been into working
out and exercise, and elevating
the mind and cognition.
The military-- I wasn't able
to speak out about things,
as part of being in the
military service, you know.
>>NOORY: Yes, sir.
No, sir.
>>STEWART: Mhm.
As soon as I got
out, I was in a band.
And I started speaking
out about everything
I was seeing in the
world in the band.
And then I started--
basically, I got really sick.
I lost a lot of weight.
And I had to rethink
what health was to me.
So the more I started looking
into different avenues
of real health, it
was also getting
into the health of the mind.
And when I started
piecing together
over 20 different
disciplines, it
started turning into what I now
call the super-human genesis.
>>NOORY: So you did
this a lot on your own.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Well, actually-- so I'm 34 now.
When I hit 33,
there was this point
where I just decided to
learn as much as I could--
>>NOORY: You're such
an old man, Ben.
>>STEWART: I know.
It's getting to me.
But I started learning
everything I could--
spinning fire-- spinning
poi; juggling; hacky sack;
movement training; ice baths;
and breathing techniques;
cognition; anything I could do
that was just learning about
how--
who I am and how I engage with
the environment around me.
>>NOORY: Would you say that
most people just don't get it,
in terms of their own health--
mental and physical?
>>STEWART: I say that we get to
a point where we're not sick,
and we call that health.
And then nothing
calls us beyond.
And that's why I'm here, is
because I had nobody really
calling me beyond.
I had to--
I had to get sick for
me to start really
asking myself, what is health.
So, I think, a lot of people--
they get into a comfort zone.
And that's where they just
kind of stay and they flatline.
And I'm here to say, our
potential is way up here.
And we are operating
way down here.
>>NOORY: And we're
human beings, Ben.
So we have these ups
and downs in life--
both physical and
mental, as well.
How do you keep pushing yourself
to try to stay above that?
>>STEWART: Really,
it's difficult to say,
because there is
this inner calling.
And I do have
moments where I don't
feel that I'm good enough.
But, I would say, the best
thing for me is family--
family and friends.
I have a beautiful wife and
a beautiful one-year-old
daughter.
>>NOORY: Beautiful.
>>STEWART: And I can't fail.
So that's what it is.
I don't have the option
to stay where I'm at.
I need to keep
developing, because I'm
setting an example for a little
girl coming into this world.
>>NOORY: Did you have someone
that you could tap into who
helped teach you these things?
Or did you have to do
this all on your own?
>>STEWART: I would
say everything
that I've done has to do
with finding individuals
in different
disciplines, all over.
And, as I would find them,
they would speak something--
some form of my
language that I would--
not fully understand
it, but I would
know that this is what I
needed to dive into and learn.
And then, as I
started learning all
these different
disciplines, I began
to realize that my
place in all of it
is not to become the
expert in any one field,
but to homogenize it, and bring
it into one discipline that
is super-human ascension.
>>NOORY: Ben, in
one of your films,
called "Kymatica,"
you kind of take
a look at the
separation, the divorce,
between nature and human beings.
>>STEWART: An explanation
of our conscious universe
has been attempted by religion,
science, and philosophy.
The neglect of biological
nature from any organism
causes illness.
A divorce from nature,
exile from Eden,
confounding of tongues--
they are all symptoms-- not
of a biblical god, or deity,
but the true self.
The greatest and only
threat to ourselves
is a loss of self, the
death of our divinity.
>>NOORY: Nice job.
Now what does kymatica mean?
>>STEWART: Kymatica
is a Greek term
for cymatics, which is basically
just the science of sound
and matter and the
interplay between them.
So that's-- as a musician,
I love that term.
But that, to me, is
the entire universe.
It's all the interplay
between vibration and matter.
>>NOORY: And when we
separate from nature,
when we divorce from
nature, what is that?
>>STEWART: Basically, that means
that we're lost as a species,
as far as nature is concerned.
We don't eat natural diets
like our ancestors did.
We move through flattened
architectural design, not
the lush and dynamic
nature that we used to.
And we're also mixing together
social groups quicker,
with different value groups--
value systems-- quicker
than we ever have.
So, basically, put
all that together
and we have a brand new set of
stressors for the human body
and the mind to deal
with, that evolution never
prepared us for.
So that's the real separation of
nature and where we are today.
Ben, Ben, do you think most
people are simply out of touch
with nature?
>>STEWART: I believe so.
And I think that culture
and our economic climate
really makes a lot of things
fascinating that aren't
a part of nature anymore.
We're marveling in
our own creations,
and forgetting about the
rich dynamics of nature--
which isn't negative per se.
But when we get lost in that
marveling of our own creations,
we forget about
the natural world.
>>NOORY: When you got sick--
and if you don't want
to talk about it,
specifically, let me know--
but what happened to you?
>>STEWART: Oh, man.
Basically, this was exactly
when I met my fiancee.
And I was actually doing
a tour through Europe.
And that was how I met her.
And I think I just wore
my body down a lot.
I wasn't taking care of myself.
I was living at the extremes.
I was partying a lot.
And I lost about 25
pounds in seven days.
I was bedridden in Europe.
And so that's how things kind
of broke down in my life.
But I also thought that--
I had crazy ideas of
what I was actually
dealing with at the time,
like what my illness was.
And that was at
the point where I
realized that I hadn't been
treating myself correctly.
I hadn't been actually
loving this thing.
I'd been using it as a
tool for gratification.
So that was my
divorce from nature.
And that was,
really, the impetus
that started leading
me into the health
that I'm getting into now.
>>NOORY: Had you
continued on that course,
would you have died?
>>STEWART: I'm pretty sure.
Either that, or I'd be--
I love Charlie Sheen--
but I'd probably
be like looking a lot older
and just a lot more beat
up by life, in the way
that you see Charlie
Sheen in the past five years.
His face has changed.
And I think I would have
probably gone down that road.
>>NOORY: If you had that
chance to talk to Charlie,
what would you tell him?
Smack him in the head?
>>STEWART: No.
Mainly, I would ask him
the right questions--
you know, what do you value?
What is it that
you really value?
And what are you trying
to get out of life?
Because maybe he's
on the exact path
that he needs or wants to be.
But I had to come to the
understanding that that path--
you know, I was in a rock band.
So although being at
a party late night--
all the drugs and the sex and
the alcohol that are around.
>>NOORY: You abused
yourself, basically.
>>STEWART: I did.
I really abused myself.
And I needed to divorce
myself from what I was doing.
>>NOORY: Do you find that there
are individuals in our life
that can help us or
prevent us from reaching
these goals that we're after?
>>STEWART: Absolutely.
You know, I think that
you can look out--
you don't need to find a guru.
Your next-door neighbor probably
has the same amount of wisdom.
They've lived their life.
And, yes, there are
forces that keep us down.
There are the economic elite,
and the hidden priesthoods
above them.
And I get into them in my films.
But I started to
realize that none of us
really know these
economic elites.
We read books about them.
We may have met them
a couple of times.
But we play in different groups.
So I was into conspiracy,
and I was pointing my fingers
at them a lot.
Until I started
realizing that there
was three fingers
pointing right back at me.
We need to start looking
at our own potential
and what we can
bring to the table,
rather than saying they need
to change their behavior.
>>NOORY: When we talk about
the terms super-humans,
what does that mean to you?
>>STEWART: Basically,
that means--
it's nothing above
and beyond science.
You know, it can seem
very comic booky.
And I kind of like
that, because it
allows us to go beyond
what we allow ourselves
to believe about our potential.
But it's nothing
that's beyond science.
It's just a highly optimized
and elevated human being
in all levels.
So that means in our diet,
in our movement habits,
and in the ways that
we focus our mind.
And then putting
them all together
in support of an
intention that we have
to carry forth with our life.
>>NOORY: Ever since I've
been doing "Beyond Belief"
here on Gaia--
kicked my personal
life into high gear
as well, in terms of trying
to take care of yourself.
We're only on this
planet for a short term.
And you might as well make
it the most effective,
the best way you can.
And I started doing
all kinds of things--
some meditation; yoga-type
practices within myself;
supplements; watching
what you eat.
I'll slip once in a while.
I'll order a pizza
like the next person.
But I really have
downplayed things like that.
And it's made a
great difference.
Plus I'm trying to surround
myself around positive people,
not negativity.
Did you find that negative
people in your life
pulled you down?
>>STEWART: Yeah, absolutely.
And that's, partly,
because I didn't
have my sovereignty, in a way.
Because, you know, I think
if we were truly sovereign
and in our
super-human potential,
we'd be able to see the
people who are suffering
and their negativity, and be
able to disassociate ourselves
from it, but still
be able to help out.
But, yes, I was in a band, so
I was constantly around that.
So I was, in a sense, a
victim of that environment.
And it wasn't until I removed
myself from it that I started
realizing that everyone
who's in bands--
they eat gas station food;
they're sitting in a van
for 10--
>>NOORY: No exercise.
>>STEWART: --11 Hours a days.
No exercise.
And sedentary is
the new smoking.
Sitting is the new smoking.
So it's very nice to hear that
you've been doing all that,
because, really,
slipping up is great.
That's fine.
Because it gives us those
reference points of where
we've-- how far we've come--
as long as we keep
the trajectory
going towards elevating
our human potential.
>>NOORY: What's interesting,
too, is when you slip up,
whether it's not working
out when you're supposed to;
or not taking the right
intake of supplements;
or not eating the
right foods; you really
feel guilty about it, like
you're cheating yourself,
that you've done
something wrong.
And I kind of like that feeling.
>>STEWART: It makes us
value what it is that we're
doing throughout the day.
I always go back
to our ancestors,
because they didn't look
at anything as working out.
They moved 10 to 15
miles a day just to eat.
So even in their diet--
diet wasn't just the food
that you fit in your mouth.
It was connected to every
other activity going on
throughout the day.
They would squat, foraging
for plants for 12 hours a day.
You can hardly find somebody
who can squat for two
to five minutes nowadays.
So--
>>NOORY: And get up.
>>STEWART: Yeah, exactly.
And there was also
this great reverence.
They would have to bring all
this food back to their camp
and everyone would
celebrate the food.
So diet meant more than just
going to the grocery store--
no problem solving up here,
no problem solving down there.
But they used to have
to utilize the body
and mind in order to eat.
And they understood
that this food was
part of the great web of life.
What I've gotten into
is the connectivity
of our movement and our eating
and how to focus the mind.
And, really, the more we use
the body, the less our mind
really needs to take over.
>>NOORY: Who would
you say might be
some of the super humans
on this planet today?
My example would be someone
like Sylvester Stallone, who
looks great for his age.
>>STEWART: Yeah, absolutely.
You know, I think
these people that
have the seed of the
super-humanism in there.
Because, mainly, my definition
of the super-human--
it goes beyond just the ambition
to work out and look good
and optimize your health.
It has to go into what are
we doing for the planet.
I don't believe
that I was put here
on this planet just to look
good and to gratify myself.
So when I look at what
do I have to offer,
I'm optimizing myself--
not for myself,
but for my daughter
and for future
generations to come.
>>NOORY: Ben, in
one of your films,
"Waking Infinity," you talk
about the incredible piercing
of the four-minute mile.
>>STEWART: Prior to 1954,
people overwhelmingly agreed
that the human body was
not capable of running
a four-minute mile.
Our bone structure is not
built for it, they said.
Our lungs cannot handle
it, they claimed.
However, on May 6 of that
year, Roger Bannister
ran a mile in 0.6 seconds
under four minutes.
John Landry's best
attempt, prior to 1954,
was a four-minute
and two-second mile.
He made a statement
that the four minute
mile was a brick wall that
can not be penetrated.
He claimed he would never
attempt to beat it again.
56 days after Bannister
broke through that wall,
Landry was inspired
to try again.
His very next attempt
broke Bannister's record
by 1 and 1/2 seconds.
The following year, 37 runners
broke the four-minute mile.
The year after that, 300
runners broke through that wall.
The wall was not made of
brick, as Landry said.
It was made of belief.
>>NOORY: What an
amazing segment.
Why was the
chronology like that?
We go years without
a four-minute mile.
Then one person does it.
Then another person does it.
Then 30 people do it.
Then 300 people do it.
What made that chronology
happen the way it did?
>>STEWART: It's
belief, honestly.
Belief and hard work, but
it all starts with belief.
And that's why I love the
title of this show, "Beyond
Belief," because going
beyond the belief
limits that we set
for ourselves--
you see what happens.
Doctors, scientists, everybody
was saying, it's impossible.
The body--
>>NOORY: Can't do it.
>>STEWART: --its technology
just can't do it.
But as soon as one person did
it, people started training.
And within two years, over 300--
maybe close to 400 people--
had done it at that point.
And so that really just
shows us that the peak
of human potential
does not end here.
And it, possibly, doesn't end.
It just is governed by the
amount of belief we have.
>>NOORY: And how strong
can that belief be?
Can it be as big and as
broad as you can make it?
>>STEWART: I believe so.
But I also believe that we're
not meant for one person
to just skyrocket into that.
Because we'd be mowed down
like the tallest poppy,
due to the powers
that be on the planet.
So I believe that we
also help each other,
we lift each other
up in these ways.
So, again, I mean,
it could possibly--
I believe it can go on forever.
But I don't really have any
evidence to back that up.
So I'll just stay
with what I do know.
I know that we consistently--
throughout the
lifeline of humanity--
we consistently break
these imaginary boundaries
that we have.
And I think that's because,
as soon as we break
beyond that belief,
our mind starts
to tell the body how to adapt
to what our intention is.
>>NOORY: We know,
as people, Ben,
that when we're in the groove
we can't get out of it,
that everything seems
to be working for us.
Do you feel that way,
too, sometimes-- you just
know you're in the groove?
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Actually, there is
great terminology
that's being thrown on that--
that's called the flow state.
And I'm really into flow arts--
a lot of spinning
and things like that.
But the flow state, for the most
part, really has to do with--
whether it's extreme sports or
whether it's public speaking
or-- doesn't matter
what you're doing.
It really means--
I move in nature.
I climb trees and I--
>>NOORY: It clicks.
You know it's clicking.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
So, basically, when the brain
down-regulates and you're not
over-thinking, you still
have an intelligence
of the body that can solve
problems really immediately.
And that's what you start
learning-- people doing
Parkour and these fancy tricks.
And they're jumping over
things, and they don't
know what's on the other side.
So they immediately have to
adapt to the environment.
That, to me, is the
ultimate readiness
that we should be in in
this state of affairs
that we have on
the planet today.
>>NOORY: What importance
would you put in diet
in the scheme of things?
>>STEWART: One of the biggest.
I would say it's one
of the three biggest
important factors.
Because the external environment
dictates gene expression.
So the way our genes
express themselves--
if an asteroid hit
the planet tomorrow,
turned it into a desert, our
genes would start expressing
themselves differently.
But it's the same with
what we put in our body.
And that produces different
hormones in our body.
It changes our biochemistry.
And that changes the
internal environment,
which also affects how our
genetics express themselves.
So making very clever
choices and, really, being
sensitive to what the food's
doing inside of our body
after we've eaten it--
this will help us
understand, is this actually
serving my highest goal?
And, a lot of times,
we're so disconnected--
food is that thing that
interrupts the rest of the day.
And if we had the sensitivity
to see the flow of it,
and how it connects
to all of life,
we would understand that
the food is putting us
into mental states.
It's putting us into
hormonal states.
And this is really dictating how
we are to the people around us,
and how much capacity
we have to break
through boundaries like that.
>>NOORY: Well, I've found, too,
that moderation is incredible
and so important to
just about everything
we do-- whether it's
food, drink, emotion.
If you do it in some
form of moderation,
it's going to pay
off better for you.
>>STEWART: Yeah, I think that's
the intelligence of nature.
Because the intelligence of
nature is a balancing force.
So if you break your
arm or cut your hand,
some intelligence brings
you back into form.
And, you know, when
you've overworked yourself
and you're tired,
something brings you down
into a state of sleep.
If you don't have kids, that is.
But it's this form
of intelligence--
>>NOORY: We've all had kids.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
It's this form of
intelligence that
nourishes the balance of life.
So that word-- balance
and moderation--
we need to come to it.
We need to meet it
halfway, and not
expect that these things
will just be obvious to us.
So this is us
engaging with life.
>>NOORY: Ben, we're on a planet
and we're constantly bombarded
by toxic elements, no
matter what we do--
whether it's in the air, the
food, the water, it's there--
fluoride--
I think they should
take that out of water.
How do we combat that?
How do we fight that?
>>STEWART: Well,
the first thing is
the education of where it is.
Because most of the
time we don't realize,
it's in the technology--
the smartphones
that we're constantly touching.
It's in plastic bags.
It's in cash.
It's in cash-register receipts.
It's, basically,
everywhere around us.
And these things also act
as endocrine disruptors,
which, basically, it causes more
hormonal imbalance in the body.
So how do we combat it?
First, we educate ourselves.
And, secondly, we really need to
move more and breathe properly.
Because, with proper
posture, proper movement,
and proper breathing, this
is our elimination process,
so we can get rid
of all these toxins.
And that's when our body is
actually acting optimally.
>>NOORY: I never really
understood, years ago,
what proper meditation
meant to the human body.
I just didn't get it.
You know, growing up in the
era of the '50s and the '60s,
for me, you would see the
hippie movement of the '60s.
And they would sit
and chant and ohm--
I didn't get it.
Now I realize that
it's harmonious.
It's putting resonance together.
It's tuning up your body.
It's tapping into something
out there that works.
And it's really
important now, isn't it?
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Well, the body and the
mind are constantly
trying to harmonize themselves.
And the one thing
about meditation
is that's one of
your direct links
into your central
nervous system.
And when our central
nervous system is haywire--
not just from our diet, but
from scattered thoughts--
if we're constantly
fragmented and there's
no connectivity between
all the different things
we think we need to do
throughout the day, that
wreaks havoc on our
central nervous system.
So meditation is
really, actually-- it's
like detoxing the
brain, in the same way
that we detox the body.
And that's really important.
And it goes hand-in-hand
with proper diet
and proper movement.
>>NOORY: We are in
an electric universe.
Our bodies are loaded
with magnetic abilities.
Let's take another
look at "Kymatica,"
and how important that
is to the human body.
>>STEWART: We are,
quite literally,
an electromagnetic expression of
our highest cognitive function.
The behavior of
electromagnetism is
evident throughout
the world as dualism.
All matter contains a
negative and positive charge,
which means organisms are
built upon this foundation.
The natural homeostasis
of any organism
is a balance of both polarities.
Furthermore, research
on emotional energetics
shows that the heart's
field is a carrier
of emotional information
and a mediator
of bioelectromagnetic
communication,
within and outside the body.
Research shows our
heart's field changes
distinctly as we experience
different emotions.
It is registered in
people's brains around us
and apparently is capable
of affecting cells, water,
and DNA studied in vitro.
>>NOORY: So, Ben, how do we
stay in this state of balance,
with this kind of balance
of electromagnetics.
>>STEWART: Well, we really
just need the proper education.
And we'll know that it's the
proper education because it
allows inspiration to
come forth to apply
that education into our lives.
And we're going to need that.
It's going to take a lot of
hard work to correct our diets,
our movement patterns, and
to be able to focus the mind.
So, really, that's how we come
into this state of balance
is we just try.
We start walking that path.
And we don't let the rocks
in the road, and the bumps,
and all the creatures that
come out to greet us-- we
don't let that scare
us off the path.
We keep doing what we know
in our hearts we need to do.
>>NOORY: Why don't
schools teach us this?
They didn't teach you.
They didn't teach me.
We learned the hard
way-- trial and error.
>>STEWART: Yeah, I
have my own beliefs
about why we don't teach, you
know, the general education
board-- why it's
not taught this way.
But I also think it's--
without getting into the
conspiracy side of it--
I also think that--
>>NOORY: Oh, go ahead.
>>STEWART: I definitely think
the general education board--
there's this top-down approach
of governing everything
that the masses do.
I think the main reason is
because it's only recently that
we're understanding
what sitting all day--
like what the kids
are doing in school--
is actually doing, not just
to our bodies and causing
deficiency--
ADHD and all these other things.
But, also, it's
limiting our ability
to optimize our intelligence.
So not using the body is
limiting our intelligence
as well.
>>NOORY: Is it possible that the
curriculum just doesn't get it,
that the teachers that have
passed this down to us,
they don't understand it?
>>STEWART: It's very possible.
And I think modern society is
a testament that we're all just
operating under the
level of education
and understanding
that we've been given.
So it takes those rare few--
and these are the rare few
that I'm talking about
when I say super-humans--
to seek truth, and to
seek what that really is.
Because we need to
read between the lines.
If we're just given all that
education that we're force-fed,
we can operate
functionally in society.
But that doesn't
mean we're healthy.
So when I say super-human,
when I say a truth-seeker,
that's looking
between the lines.
Because we know something's off.
We know that there's more.
And we are here to find
it, so we can bring it out,
not just for ourselves, but
the next seven generations.
>>NOORY: I would
have loved a course
at school that would have
taught me all the stuff
that you're talking
about tonight.
I would have loved that.
It would have made things
so much easier for me.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
And I think a lot of the
kids today would also
really appreciate it.
And that's why one of
my biggest intentions--
what I want to do
in this world--
is bring a school
into this world.
It will start small, so it won't
be widespread brick and mortar.
But it can start
online and, at least,
educate the parents to know
how we as parents limit
our children without
even realizing.
We put them into sports and
say that's enough movement
for them.
But there's still an
adult telling them
what to do, how to
do it, when to do it.
And what I believe we
should really be doing
is the intelligence of
nature is in the children.
And it hasn't been conditioned
out, like the adults have it.
So we should be more observant
of what the children naturally
want to do.
And that's never sitting in a
chair, staring at a chalkboard
and listening to somebody talk.
They want to get
up and move around.
And I say, they need that.
It's not just a preference.
Movement actually makes
you more intelligent.
>>NOORY: A study just came
out that said that meditation
is better medicine than
all the psychotropic drugs
that they give people.
That's an amazing story.
It tells us exactly
that what you're saying
is absolutely the truth.
>>STEWART: I think it also
tells us what a human being is.
Because, I think, we're
put here on this planet
as students of life.
We're here to learn.
Our body wants to learn.
Our mind wants to learn.
So that's why we're never
meant to do the same thing
over and over and over again.
And the one thing
about the narcotics
that we're taking
to correct all the
hormonal issues or
the wandering mind--
it's taking-- it's robbing
the children of the ability
to be able to step into
that power on their own.
And meditation is
the exact opposite.
Meditation is
allowing that child
to calm themselves down and
find a self-soothing routine.
>>NOORY: In terms of
exercise, what do you do?
And is it different from
what people generally do?
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Because exercise is typified
by repetitious movement,
like going on a treadmill,
doing the same thing.
Or overworking vanity muscles--
monkey see, monkey do.
We see other people,
you know, bench pressing
and stuff like that.
But that's overworking
some muscles
and forgetting about the
core stabilizer muscles.
And that's the
definition of imbalance.
So what I mean is not--
it's not a method to look better
or to lose weight or detox.
Really, what it's meant to do is
to get you to move differently,
explore different loads
that you put on the body.
Because this is how your
body opens itself up
to intelligence from the
environment, to embody itself.
And then we can access it.
And that's where the
intelligence-- that's
how we embody it and
it turns into wisdom,
is when we've embodied the
knowledge that we have.
>>NOORY: And is it an
unusual series of exercises?
Is it hard to learn?
>>STEWART: Not really.
It's actually much more
primal than you would imagine.
You know, I mean, for one--
go out and climb a tree.
There's so much
dynamics and rich,
you know, dynamics in a tree,
that you won't find in a gym.
And you know that
a pull-up bar is
going to hold you, because
some person made sure
that it's going to hold you.
But a branch-- you don't know.
So there's all this
problem-solving.
Climbing a tree,
going rock climbing,
swimming through
natural water outside,
which is typically a lot
colder than the water
that we like to be in.
Moving through nature
is, more or less,
what I'm talking about.
Because working out in a gym
is not a learning environment
for the brain.
>>NOORY: And the location
of where you do this--
is it important?
Because I know,
for example, when
you do some of these
exercises, you're
out in the woods somewhere.
So what are you doing here?
>>STEWART: Well, this
is actually Ben Medder.
He's a natural movement
coach in the UK.
Soon we'll see me getting
into different exercises.
But here, this is just exploring
how the body has to move around
differently through nature.
This is me and my daughter.
And, you know, these--
>>NOORY: That's the exercise?
>>STEWART: These are
some of the exercises.
And, basically-- and
this is the ice bath.
It's not the most
fun thing to do.
But it really engages
the body in the same way
that our ancestors had to.
Because they had
to-- in the winter--
wade through water to
go catch their fish.
And they had to
climb through trees
to survey the landscape, to see
where predator or prey might
be.
>>NOORY: How often are
you doing that, every day?
>>STEWART: Every day.
Every day.
And I don't suggest
that everyone
should be doing it every day.
I say, we should start
introducing it into our lives
and discovering the inspiration
that it'll give you.
I'm not telling people, you
need to do five hours of this
a week.
It should tell you how much
you should be doing it.
But we should definitely
be moving our bodies a lot
more than we are now.
>>NOORY: So that's what
you're basically doing--
you're moving your body
with those exercises--
because rolling-- throwing
the ball in the air,
moving around like that,
and stuff like that.
>>STEWART: Yeah, because--
I won't get into the ultra
minutiae of the science of it.
But everything that
you saw up there is--
they're different loads that
you're placing on the body.
They're different
manipulations of the body.
And what that does is that sends
new information to the cells.
And if the cells aren't
getting new information,
then they're not in
their optimal form.
And that's what I'm
talking about-- getting
into our optimal
form-- so opening up
to the information of nature.
>>NOORY: I know some
people who will go to work;
come home and have dinner; get
on the couch; grab the clicker;
start watching television.
Then they go to bed, if
they haven't passed out
on the couch.
What kind of a
lifestyle is that?
>>STEWART: Well, that
shows you that movement,
to people like
that, is just a way
to get from one
sitting position--
or one relaxed
position-- to another.
And this is completely
the opposite from what
our ancestors--
they hardly ever sat down.
And when they did,
they were squatting.
So, nowadays, really, we
have so much furniture
that tells us, that
beckons us, come lay down.
Get as comfy as
you possibly can.
But we don't really
set our houses up
to move in many different ways.
We have the steps to help
us get up the stairs.
But that's about it.
>>NOORY: Let's talk about
it in terms of age, Ben.
If you're in your 20s--
and we're going to elevate
up to 60 or 70 here--
but when you're in your
20s, what should you
be doing lifestyle-wise?
>>STEWART: Well, because you
can bounce back so quickly,
I would say, really experiment
with the three major things
that I tell people to do--
is focus on your diet,
focus on your movement
and your posture,
and also focus on the
celebration and the fun aspect
that you bring into it.
So, for people in
their 20s, I would say,
move through nature a lot more.
Try some ice baths, some things
that really challenge you.
And the point that this
is not, again, to get
all buff and good looking.
It's to teach your body how to
deal with stressful situations.
Because there's an
intrinsic reward--
dopamine and different
things like that.
But there's also the
intelligent reward in that.
And, also, if you fast or if you
try dieting every now and then,
your body is going
to deal with hunger.
And we typically freak
out when we're hungry,
but ancestors-- they used
to go days without eating.
And it wouldn't freak them
out, because they understood
that this is just a signal from
the body telling us something.
>>NOORY: 30s to 40s.
>>STEWART: From
that point, you want
to start taking a look at
how you're bouncing back
from injuries.
And you want to be more
intelligent about biomechanics.
So it's not just
about moving more,
it's moving more intelligently.
You want to learn how
to bend over properly.
to kneel down and squat.
Posture-- learning posture is
probably the number one thing
we should be doing
throughout our life,
is learning how to
stand and sit correctly,
so all of our tissues
are un-inhibiting--
or not inhibiting blood flow.
>>NOORY: 40s to 60.
>>STEWART: 40s to 60s--
it's the same thing.
We're just now getting up into
the point where you really
need to start making sure
you're not overdoing it.
A lot of people think--
>>NOORY: So maybe
not as intense.
>>STEWART: Not as intense.
Because a lot of the
times people ran marathons
five years ago and
they still think
they're in that kind of shape,
but they haven't done it.
So, really, just pay more
attention to your body.
And this is-- honestly, when
you're getting up there in age,
it's a great opportunity to
start listening to your body
more.
>>NOORY: When you're out
in public and someone
might come up to you and say,
god, you look good today.
You look refreshed.
And they see something,
obviously, right?
Or they wouldn't have said that.
Does that mean it's working--
whatever you're
doing, it's working?
>>STEWART: I believe it is.
And even that,
specifically, that's
also a testament that
we are optimistic,
and optimism, and celebration.
I, very much so, get into the
shamanic aspect of this, which
is adding ceremony into it.
So it's not just moving out--
moving for the sake
of moving and dieting
for the sake of dieting, but
it's putting them all together
and holding it and focusing
it on an intention.
And that's why people will
say, you look good today,
because you're open to nature.
You're not inhibiting the
intelligence of nature
to come in, and you're
attuning with nature.
And that will give you all
the energy that you need.
>>NOORY: While human beings are
adaptable; they're intelligent;
they're geniuses when it
comes to certain things.
In your film, "Ungrip," you
take a look at human ingenuity.
It's amazing.
>>STEWART: Human ingenuity
can surmount any obstacle.
The only requirement is
the desire to surmount.
If we are willing to complain
or rebel against the system that
governs our actions, we should
know how and why it does so.
In doing this, it is important
to understand who we are,
where we are, and
what options we have.
>>NOORY: I remember some
of those clips, Ben.
I remember those days,
in the news business,
or as a younger person,
seeing Mao Tse-tung and Lyndon
Johnson.
Those were difficult
times for a lot of people.
>>STEWART: Yeah, they were.
And, honestly, those
difficult times
lead us to where we are today.
But it also-- this
is where we draw
on a lot of our inspiration.
You know, if we
could survive times
like that, through the Great
Depression and through war,
we can survive what
we're dealing with today.
But, like I said in
that clip, we really
need to have the desire to
overcome these obstacles.
And I believe the
biggest obstacle
is, we don't see the
obstacle in front of us.
We just call it modern
society and living.
>>NOORY: With your little
girl, what will you
do to her to train her so she's
ready when she's an adult?
>>STEWART: Really, exactly
what I said before.
I'm trying to step
out of the way
and see where her intelligence
naturally takes her.
But in her path I'm going to
start putting instruments.
I want her to learn music.
I want her to use her
voice and sing a lot more.
Any type of movement
she wants to do.
I'm going to get
her swimming out
in nature and in
colder bodies of water,
climbing through trees.
And I will be there
to protect her,
but I will not be
there to limit any
of where her natural
intelligence is
trying to bring her.
>>NOORY: And when
she's 18 and wants
to be a teacher or
a rock star, are you
going to get in the way of that?
>>STEWART: Absolutely not,
because it doesn't matter
what profession
you're in or what
you want to do with your life.
As long as she's
coming from the heart,
and as long as she wants to
help the people around her,
I'm going to be behind her 100%.
>>NOORY: What motivates
you here, Ben?
What pushes you?
>>STEWART: Knowing
that the world is not
going to get any better by 7
billion people just sitting
around waiting for somebody
else to be the super here.
So I'm not saying
I'm super-human,
but I'm definitely on that path.
And I'm also here to show
other people the way.
You know, I can only say
as much as I've learned.
But as much as I've
learned I'm going to say.
And I want to set up a school.
I want to educate
people with the two best
forms of nourishment we could be
giving the planet and people--
and that's love and truth.
>>NOORY: We've seen a lot of
the physical that you've done.
But, as you well know,
and as you've practiced,
the mind is just as important.
How do you segue-way the two?
How does that transition occur--
the consciousness of the
mind, and the physical,
built of training and exercise?
>>STEWART: Again, it's
perspective and belief
that these two
things are separated.
It's the way that
we decode reality,
that we believe our
mind and our bodies
are in two different categories.
So, to me, it's really
about not over-thinking
it-- definitely studying,
but using the body more.
Because that allows the mind
to calm down a little bit.
And we don't have to hold
on to every passing thought
that we have.
And that's a part of
meditation as well.
So I say meditation and
movement of the body
are two great ways to harmonize
the body and the mind.
>>NOORY: Can this affect
emotion one way or another,
that if you do this, you're
generally a happier person,
and that means you'll
reflect that in your living
with other people?
>>STEWART: Absolutely.
I mean, for one,
exercise in and of itself
creates a better
hormonal balance.
And so that's the
hormonal side of it.
But the deep inner
fulfillment that, I believe,
happiness really, really needs--
that deep, inner
fulfillment comes
from knowing that we're not just
doing something good for us,
but we're doing something
good for the planet.
And we're also
looking down the line
at the next few generations
that are coming.
>>NOORY: Now everybody
is an individual
and they have their own
particular likes and dislikes.
But, in your particular
case, when you meditate,
what do you do?
>>STEWART: Only recently have I
done it in the seated position.
And, really, what I do the
most is I focus on posture.
And I focus on
everything that's--
>>NOORY: Are you comfortable--
>>STEWART: --preparatory.
>>NOORY: --when you do it?
>>STEWART: Sometimes.
And sometimes my
body will tell me
something different
from day to day--
like there'll be a
twinge in my back.
And that's what I'm meditating
on for the next 20 minutes,
is the fact that my
back isn't comfortable.
But if I allow myself to
relax, and if I understand
that correct posture is what
I'm aiming at, then, eventually,
when I arrive at correct
posture and then that's easy,
the mind will settle down.
Because a lot of the times,
our mind is so chaotic
because our body is
receiving so much stimulus
and we can't sit still.
We're always fidgeting.
>>NOORY: You're
still doing music
>>STEWART: Yes, very much so.
>>NOORY: When you have been
doing these programs for Gaia
now for several years,
have you seen, personally,
an evolution with yourself
in terms of things
you're learning and changing?
>>STEWART: Absolutely.
And Gaia has actually been
a great wealth of knowledge
for me.
I go through, and every
free moment I have I
look through that whole catalog.
But, yes, through
the past decade
that I've been
making these films
and really getting
the word out, I
would say the best
improvements that I've
noticed have come
from people who
send me emails, either
challenging things that I say
or bringing up just
different ideas.
So, really, I put
myself out there.
And people may look at me
as a teacher or a leader.
But, really, I find myself to
be the student of all the people
that are sending me
emails, telling me how
my work has changed their life.
>>NOORY: And how do people
e-mail you, by the way?
>>STEWART:
Talismanicidols@gmail.com.
And the web site is
talismanicidols.net.
>>NOORY: And "Kymatica" you
can watch on gaia.com, right?
>>STEWART: You can
watch that on Gaia.
You can watch everything
that I've done on Gaia now.
>>NOORY: If there
was one message--
one message-- that
you would like
to impart to everybody
watching you today on "Beyond
Belief," what would that be?
>>STEWART: Authenticity.
The more you step and stand
in your own authenticity,
and be you, no matter
what other people say,
no matter what kind of box other
people try and fit you into;
if you carry on in your path
as authentically as possible,
you are a super-human.
>>NOORY: Can we survive, as
a species, by doing this,
in spite of what's
happening on this planet?
>>STEWART: Everything that
I've said about the toxins
in our diets, the problems
of the way we move,
and the scattered mind--
if we're not flat out on
the floor because of that,
we're still up
and moving around,
building our society
at an astonishing rate.
So we have a lot of energy.
What we really need is
just the proper education,
to focus it on a
better path that's
actually beneficial for the
planet, not just an elite few
at the top.
>>NOORY: If you saw
someone who was unhealthy,
emotionally and physically--
probably caused by
their own actions--
how would you turn them around?
>>NOORY: First, I would start
with just a bunch of questions.
I would see where
their values are-- what
it is that they actually value.
And then I would show them
that the answer is just
the riddle of life.
Our confusion and when
we're downtrodden--
that's a riddle.
And the answer is
inherent within it.
So asking them questions
and getting them
in their own intelligence
to figure out
the solution to
their own problem,
because I don't have it.
You know, I'm no guru.
I'm not here to give my message
that other people should
follow.
I'm here giving methods to
unleash our own intelligence.
And that's the way to get out
of any rut that you're in.
>>NOORY: Ben, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>STEWART: It's
an honor, George.
>>NOORY: And I look forward
to your shows on Gaia.com.
>>STEWART: Thank you.
Me too.
>>NOORY: So take the techniques
that Ben has taught us.
Because we are subject to
the frailties of life-- ups
and downs.
But if you learn some
of these techniques,
physically and emotionally--
what you eat, how you exercise,
you're going to be
better prepared to combat
these problems of life.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]